So let's dive deeper into indexedDB. You learned that it's a key-value database,
actually it's a transactional key-value database running in the browser and that of course is important,
it's not running on a server.
Now what does transactional mean? Transactional simply means that if one of the actions in a given transaction
fails, none of the actions are applied to keep database integrity.
So this basically means if you're trying to write something to the database and you're writing 10 lines
to the database, 10 entries and one of these writes fails, none of the entries are added, for a good reason,
you want to ensure that the database doesn't enter some invalid state thereafter because you kind of
wrote some of the data and you don't know which data was written,
so therefore you have this transactional approach, every operation of a given transaction has to succeed
for the whole transaction to succeed.
Now in practice, this shouldn't cause you too much of a headache,
it's really easy to use that model,
it's just important for you to know
you have that extra security layer.
Now another important thing is, that you can store significant amounts of unstructured data including
files and blobs.
Now I said that it's best for JSON data and not so much for CSS files and
so on
but theoretically, you can also store files in there. If you have some data which is like a title, a course
description and a content of a text field
but you also have an image of the post or course or whatever you're storing in indexedDB, you can store
that file directly in the database. And unstructured data just means you don't have to define a scheme
upfront,
you can store whichever data in whichever structure you want to store. Due to this key-value nature,
it's basically like a Javascript object,
you can have nested objects, nested properties,
you can have arrays in there, you can store all of that in indexedDB.
It can also be accessed asynchronously.
Now this is important because whilst you can access it synchronously too, due to it being accessible asynchronously,
you can use it in a service worker because remember, service workers are all about listening events,
they have this asynchronous nature, therefore it's synchronous only code can't be run in service workers.
Hence being able to asynchronously access indexedDB is the reason why it is so great,
you can use it from both your normal Javascript code which is loaded through your pages as well as through
service workers. That as a side note is also the difference to local storage.
You might be aware that in the browser there is local storage and session storage,
now both of these are accessed synchronously and therefore can't be used in service workers,
that's the reason why you typically use indexedDB.
It also has great browsers support
but I'll come back to that.
Now inside an indexedDB or inside that construct, you can actually have multiple databases but typically,
you have one per application. In a given database though, you again have multiple object stores,
this is something like a table
and since your data can be unstructured and doesn't have to follow a schema, you can basically put whichever
data you want into a database and into an object store.
Now inside an object store, you store the objects and that's just,
well the data you want to put there. That's indexedDB in a nutshell.
You probably learn more about it by simply using it,
so that's what we're going to do next.
Not before having a look at in which browsers we can actually use it though.